Section I

General Provisions

Article 1

1. The Republic of Kazakhstan proclaims itself a democratic, secular, legal and social state, the supreme values of which are the individual, his or her life, rights and freedoms.

2. The basic principles of the activity of the Republic shall be public harmony and political stability, economic development for the benefit of the whole nation, Kazakh patriotism and resolution of the most critical issues of state affairs by democratic methods, including voting by republican referendum or in Parliament.  

Footnote: See Resolution No. 18/2 of the Constitutional Council of the Republic of Kazakhstan of 21 December 2001.

Article 2

1. The Republic of Kazakhstan is a unitary state with a presidential form of government.

2. The sovereignty of the Republic shall extend over its entire territory. The state shall ensure the integrity, inviolability and inalienability of its territory.

3. The administrative-territorial structure of the Republic and the status of its capital shall be determined by law. The capital of Kazakhstan shall be the city of Astana.

3-1. A special legal regime in the financial sphere may be established within the boundaries of the city of Astana in accordance with the constitutional law.

4. The names "Republic of Kazakhstan" and "Kazakhstan" shall be equal.

Footnote: See Resolution No. 4 of the Constitutional Council of the Republic of Kazakhstan of 23 April 2003.
Footnote: Article 2 as amended by the Law of the Republic of Kazakhstan No. 254-III of 21 May 2007 (in force from the date of its official publication); No. 51-VI of 10 March 2017 (in force from the date of its first official publication); No. 238-VI of 23 March 2019 (in force from the date of its first official publication); No. 142-VII of 17 September 2022 (in force from the date of its first official publication).
 

Article 3

1. The people shall be the sole source of governmental power.

2. The people shall exercise their power directly through republican referendum and free elections, and shall delegate the exercise of their powers to state institutions.

3. No one shall have the right to arrogate power in the Republic of Kazakhstan. Arrogation of power shall be punished by law. The right to act on behalf of the people and the state shall be vested in the President of the Republic and the Parliament of the Republic within the limits of their constitutional powers. The Government of the Republic and other state bodies shall act on behalf of the state only within the limits of the powers delegated to them.

4. State power in the Republic of Kazakhstan shall be unified and shall be exercised on the basis of the Constitution and laws in accordance with the principle of its division into legislative, executive and judicial powers and their interaction using the system of checks and balances.

Footnote. See Resolution No. 1/2 of the Constitutional Council of the Republic of Kazakhstan of 12 April 2001.
 

Article 4

1. The provisions of the Constitution, laws adopted in accordance with it, other regulatory legal acts, international treaties and other obligations of the Republic, as well as regulatory decisions of the Constitutional Court and the Supreme Court of the Republic shall be valid law in the Republic of Kazakhstan.
Note. In accordance with the Law of the Republic of Kazakhstan dated 8 June 2022, regulatory decisions of the Constitutional Council, if they do not contradict the Constitution, shall be applied until they are reviewed by the Constitutional Court.

2. The Constitution shall have supreme legal force and direct effect throughout the territory of the Republic.

3. International treaties ratified by the Republic shall take precedence over its laws. The procedure and conditions for implementing international treaties to which Kazakhstan is a party on the territory of the Republic of Kazakhstan shall be determined by the laws of the Republic.

4. All laws and international treaties to which the Republic is a party shall be published. Official publication of normative legal acts concerning rights, freedoms and duties of citizens shall be a necessary condition for their application.

Footnote. See Resolutions of the Constitutional Council of the Republic of Kazakhstan No. 18/2 of 11 October 2000; No. 6 of 5 November 2009.
Footnote. Article 4 as amended by Laws of the Republic of Kazakhstan No. 51-VI of 10 March 2017 (in force from the date of its first official publication); of 08 June 2022 (in force from 01 January 2023).
 

Article 5

1. Ideological and political diversity shall be recognised in the Republic of Kazakhstan. The establishment of political party organisations in state bodies shall not be permitted.

2. Public associations shall be equal before the law. Illegal interference of the state in the affairs of public associations and public associations in the affairs of the state, transfer of functions of state bodies to public associations shall not be permitted.

3. The establishment and activity of public associations whose aims or actions are aimed at violent change of the constitutional system, violation of the integrity of the Republic, undermining the security of the state, incitement to social, racial, national, religious, class and tribal enmity, as well as the establishment of paramilitary units not provided for by law, shall be prohibited.

4. The activities of political parties and trade unions of other states, parties on a religious basis, as well as the financing of political parties and trade unions by foreign legal entities and citizens, foreign states and international organisations shall not be permitted in the Republic.      

5. The activities of foreign religious associations on the territory of the Republic, as well as the appointment of leaders of religious associations in the Republic by foreign religious centres, shall be carried out in coordination with the competent state bodies of the Republic.

Footnote. See Resolution No. 4/2 of the Constitutional Council of the Republic of Kazakhstan of 7 June 2000.
Footnote. Article 5 as amended by the Law of the Republic of Kazakhstan No. 254-III of 21 May 2007 (in force from the date of its official publication).
 

Article 6

1. State and private property shall be equally recognised and protected in the Republic of Kazakhstan.

2. Property shall impose obligations, and at the same time its use shall be for the benefit of society. The subjects and objects of property, the scope and limits of the rights of owners, and guarantees of their protection shall be determined by law.

3. Land and its subsoil, water, flora and fauna and other natural resources belong to the people. The State shall exercise the right of ownership on behalf of the people. Land may also be privately owned on the grounds, under the conditions and within the limits established by law.

Footnote. See Resolution No. 19/2 of the Constitutional Council of the Republic of Kazakhstan of 3 November 1999; Resolution No. 2/2 of the Constitutional Council of the Republic of Kazakhstan of 13 April 2000; Resolution No. 1/2 of the Constitutional Council of the Republic of Kazakhstan of 12 April 2001; Resolution No. 4 of the Constitutional Council of the Republic of Kazakhstan of 23 April 2003.
Footnote. Article 6 as amended by the Law of the Republic of Kazakhstan of 8 June 2022 (entered into force on 8 June 2022).

 

Article 7

1. The state language of the Republic of Kazakhstan shall be the Kazakh language.

2. In state organisations and local self-government bodies, the Russian language shall be officially used on an equal footing with the Kazakh language.

3. The state shall create conditions for the study and development of the languages of the people of Kazakhstan.

Article 8

The Republic of Kazakhstan shall respect the principles and norms of international law, pursue a policy of cooperation and good-neighbourly relations among states, their equality and non-interference in each other's internal affairs, peaceful settlement of international disputes, and renounce the first use of armed force.

Footnote. See Resolution No. 1/2 of the Constitutional Council of the Republic of Kazakhstan of 12 April 2001.
 

Article 9

The Republic of Kazakhstan shall have its state symbols - the flag, emblem, and the anthem. Their description and the procedure of their official use shall be determined by the constitutional law.

Footnote. Article 9 was amended in the Kazakh language, the text in the Russian language was not amended by the Law of the Republic of Kazakhstan No. 254-III of 21 May 2007 (in force from the date of its official publication).
 

 Section II

 Man and citizen

Article 10

1. Citizenship of the Republic of Kazakhstan shall be acquired and terminated in accordance with the law and shall be uniform and equal regardless of the reasons for its acquisition.

2. A citizen of the Republic may not be deprived of citizenship, may not be deprived of the right to change citizenship, and may not be expelled from Kazakhstan. Deprivation of citizenship shall be allowed only by a court decision for committing terrorist crimes, as well as for causing other serious damage to the vital interests of the Republic of Kazakhstan.

3. A citizen of the Republic shall not be recognised as a citizen of another state.

Footnote. See Resolution No. 12 of the Constitutional Council of the Republic of Kazakhstan of 1 December 2003.
Footnote. Article 10 as amended by the Law of the Republic of Kazakhstan No. 51-VI of 10 March 2017 (in force from the date of its first official publication).
 

Article 11

1. A citizen of the Republic of Kazakhstan shall not be extradited to a foreign state, unless international treaties of the Republic provide otherwise.

2. The Republic shall provide its citizens with protection and assistance outside its borders.

 

Article 12

1. Human rights and freedoms shall be recognised and guaranteed in the Republic of Kazakhstan in accordance with the Constitution.

2. Human rights and freedoms shall belong to everyone from birth, shall be recognised as absolute and inalienable, and shall determine the content and implementation of laws and other regulatory legal acts.

3. Every citizen of the Republic shall have rights and duties by virtue of citizenship.

4. Aliens and stateless persons in the Republic shall enjoy the rights and freedoms and bear the duties established for citizens, unless otherwise provided by the Constitution, laws and international treaties.

5. The exercise of human and civil rights and freedoms shall not violate the rights and freedoms of others, nor shall it violate the constitutional system and public morality.

Footnote. See Resolutions No. 12 of 1 December 2003, No. 4 of 18 April 2007 of the Constitutional Council of the Republic of Kazakhstan.
 

Article 13

1. Everyone shall have the right to recognition as a person before the law and to the defence of his/her rights and freedoms by all means not inconsistent with the law, including necessary defence.

2. Everyone shall have the right to judicial protection of his/her rights and freedoms.

3. Everyone shall have the right to qualified legal assistance. In the cases provided for by law, legal assistance shall be provided free of charge.

Footnote. See Resolutions No. 7/2 of 29 March 1999, No. 1 of 15 February 2002 of the Constitutional Council of the Republic of Kazakhstan.
 

Article 14

1. Everyone shall be equal before the law and court.

2. No one shall be discriminated against on the grounds of origin, social, official or property status, sex, race, nationality, language, attitude to religion, convictions, place of residence or any other circumstance.

Footnote. See Resolutions No. 2/2 of 10 March 1999, No. 7/2 of 20 March 1999 of the Constitutional Council of the Republic of Kazakhstan.
 

Article 15

1. Everyone shall have the right to life.

2. No one shall have the right to arbitrary deprivation of life. The death penalty is prohibited.

Footnote. See Resolution No. 10 of the Constitutional Council of the Republic of Kazakhstan of 30 January 2003;
Footnote. Article 15 as amended by Laws of the Republic of Kazakhstan No. 254-III of 21 May 2007 (in force from the date of its first official publication); of 08 June 2022 (entered into force on 8 June 2022).

 

Article 16

1. Everyone shall have the right to personal liberty.

2. Arrest and detention shall be permitted only in the cases provided for by law and only with the authorisation of a court and with the right of the detained person to appeal. A person may not be detained for more than seventy-two hours without the authorisation of a court.

3. Anyone detained, arrested or accused of committing a crime has the right to the assistance of a lawyer (defence counsel) from the moment of detention, arrest or accusation.

Footnote. See Resolution No. 13 of the Constitutional Council of the Republic of Kazakhstan of 31 December 2003.
Footnote. Article 16 as amended by the Law of the Republic of Kazakhstan No. 254-III of 21 May 2007 (in force from the date of its official publication).
 

Article 17

1. Human dignity shall be inviolable.

2. No one shall be subjected to torture, violence or other cruel or degrading treatment or punishment.

 

Article 18

1. Everyone shall have the right to inviolability of private life, to privacy and family secrecy, and to the protection of honour and dignity.

2. Everyone shall have the right to privacy of his or her secrets and savings, correspondence, telephone conversations, postal, telegraphic and other communications. Restrictions on this right shall be permitted only in cases and in accordance with procedures expressly provided for by law.

3. State bodies, public associations, officials and the mass media shall be obliged to provide every citizen with the opportunity to become acquainted with documents, decisions and sources of information concerning his or her rights and interests.

Footnote. See Normative Resolution No. 5 of the Constitutional Council of the Republic of Kazakhstan of 20 August 2009.
 

Article 19

1. Everyone shall have the right to choose and to declare or not to declare his or her nationality, political party and religious affiliation.

2. Everyone shall have the right to use his or her mother tongue and culture and to choose freely the language of communication, education, training and creativity.

 

Article 20

1. Freedom of expression and creativity shall be guaranteed. Censorship shall be prohibited.

2. Everyone shall have the right to freely receive and disseminate information by any means not prohibited by law. The list of information constituting state secrets of the Republic of Kazakhstan shall be determined by law.

3. Propaganda or agitation for violent change of the constitutional system, violation of the integrity of the Republic, undermining of state security, advocacy of war, social, racial, national, religious, class and clan superiority, as well as the cult of cruelty and violence shall be prohibited.


Article 21

1. Anyone lawfully residing in the territory of the Republic of Kazakhstan shall have the right to freedom of movement within the territory of the Republic of Kazakhstan and to freedom of choice of place of residence, except for the cases provided for by law.

2. Everyone shall have the right to leave the territory of the Republic. Citizens of the Republic shall have the right to return to the Republic without hindrance.

 

Article 22

1. Everyone shall have the right to freedom of conscience.

2. The right to freedom of conscience shall not be subject to or limited by any universal human and civil right or duty to the State.

 

Article 23

1. Citizens of the Republic of Kazakhstan shall have the right to freedom of association. The activity of public associations shall be regulated by law.

2. Chairmen and judges of the Constitutional Court, the Supreme Court and other courts, chairmen and members of the Central Election Commission, the Supreme Audit Chamber of the Republic, military servicemen, employees of national security and law enforcement bodies may not be members of political parties, trade unions or advocates of any political party.

Footnote. See Resolution No. 13/2 of the Constitutional Council of the Republic of Kazakhstan of 5 July 2000.
Footnote. Article 23 as amended by the Law of the Republic of Kazakhstan of 8 June 2022 (entered into force on 8 June 2022).
 

Article 24

1. Everyone shall have the right to free choice of work, occupation and profession. Forced labour shall be permitted only on the basis of a court order following conviction for a criminal or administrative offence, or in the event of a state of emergency or martial law.

2. Everyone shall have the right to working conditions that meet safety and health requirements, to remuneration for work without discrimination and to social protection against unemployment.

3. The right to individual and collective labour disputes shall be recognised, with the use of legally established means for their settlement, including the right to strike.

4. Everyone shall have the right to rest. Persons working under contract shall be guaranteed the legally established length of working hours, days of rest and public holidays, and paid annual leave.

Footnote. See Resolution No. 2/2 of the Constitutional Council of the Republic of Kazakhstan of 10 March 1999.
Footnote. Article 24 as amended by the Law of the Republic of Kazakhstan of 8 June 2022 (entered into force on 8 June 2022).
 

Article 25

1. The right to housing shall be inviolable. No one may be deprived of housing except by a court decision. Access to housing, its inspection and search shall be permitted only in the cases and according to the procedure prescribed by law.

2. The Republic of Kazakhstan shall create conditions for providing citizens with housing. Citizens in need of housing shall be provided with affordable housing from state housing funds in accordance with the norms established by law.

 

Article 26

1. Citizens of the Republic of Kazakhstan shall be private owners of all legally acquired property.

2. Property, including the right of inheritance, shall be guaranteed by law.

3. No one shall be deprived of his/her property, unless otherwise provided by a court decision. Forced alienation of property for public use in exceptional cases specified by law shall be subject to equal compensation.

4. Everyone shall have the right to freedom of economic activity and free use of property for any lawful economic activity. Monopolistic activities shall be regulated and limited by law. Unfair competition shall be prohibited.

Footnote. See Resolution No. 6/2 of the Constitutional Council of the Republic of Kazakhstan of 16 June 2000; Resolution No. 21/2 of the Constitutional Council of the Republic of Kazakhstan of 20 December 2000; Resolution No. 4 of the Constitutional Council of the Republic of Kazakhstan of 1 July 2005; No. 5 of 28 May 2007.
 

Article 27

1. Marriage and the family, maternity, paternity and childhood shall be protected by the state.

2. The care and upbringing of children shall be the natural right and duty of parents.

3. Able-bodied adult children shall take care of their disabled parents.

 

Article 28

1. A citizen of the Republic of Kazakhstan shall be guaranteed a minimum wage and a pension, as well as social security in old age, in case of sickness, disability or loss of the main source of income, and on other legal grounds.

2. Voluntary social insurance, the creation of complementary forms of social security and charity shall be encouraged.

Footnote. See Resolution No. 3/2 of the Constitutional Council of the Republic of Kazakhstan of 12 March 1999.
 

Article 29

1. Citizens of the Republic of Kazakhstan shall have the right to health protection.

2. Citizens of the Republic shall have the right to free, guaranteed and comprehensive medical care in accordance with the law.

3. Paid medical care shall be provided by state and private medical institutions, as well as by persons engaged in private medical practice under the conditions and according to the terms and procedures established by law.

 

Article 30

1. Citizens shall be guaranteed free secondary education in state educational establishments. Secondary education shall be compulsory.

2. Citizens shall have the right to pursue higher education on a competitive basis in state institutions of higher education.

3. Fee-paying education in private educational institutions shall be provided on the grounds and in the manner prescribed by law.

4. The state shall set uniform compulsory standards in education. The activities of all educational institutions shall be in accordance with these standards.

 

Article 31

1. The state shall endeavour to protect the environment for the benefit of human life and health.

2. Public officials shall be held accountable in accordance with the law for concealing facts and circumstances that endanger the life and health of the people.

 

Article 32

Citizens of the Republic of Kazakhstan shall have the right to assemble peacefully and unarmed, to hold meetings, campaigns, demonstrations, street processions and pickets. The exercise of this right may be restricted by law in the interests of state security, public order, protection of health, rights and freedoms of others.

 

Article 33

1. Citizens of the Republic of Kazakhstan shall have the right to participate directly and through their representatives in the management of state affairs, to make personal, individual and collective appeals to state and local self-government bodies.

2. Citizens of the Republic shall have the right to elect and be elected to bodies of state and local self-government, as well as to participate in a republican referendum.

3. The right to elect and be elected to bodies of state and local self-government, as well as to participate in a republican referendum, shall not extend to citizens who have been declared legally incompetent by a court, or to citizens who have been placed in a detention facility by a court order.

4. Citizens of the Republic shall have equal rights to hold public office. The requirements for candidates for public office shall be determined solely by the nature of the duties of the office and shall be established by law.

Footnote. Article 33 as amended by the Law of the Republic of Kazakhstan No. 284-I of 7 October 1998 (in force from the date of its publication).
 

Article 34

1. Everyone shall observe the Constitution and laws of the Republic of Kazakhstan and respect the rights, freedoms, honour and dignity of other people.

2. Everyone shall respect the state symbols of the Republic.

Footnote. Article 34 was amended in the Kazakh language, the text in the Russian language was not amended by the Law of the Republic of Kazakhstan No. 254-III of 21 May 2007 (in force from the date of its official publication).

